Q: What is the physical nature of matter, and how does it relate to the particles of matter?
A: The physical nature of matter is that it is made up of particles, which are constantly moving. These particles can be observed through various activities, such as dissolving salt or sugar in water, diluting a solution of potassium permanganate, and observing the spreading of an incense stick's smell. The particles of matter are continuous and can move freely, even in a solid substance like a block of wood. In addition, matter can change its state, such as when ice (a solid) melts into water (a liquid), and these changes can be observed and studied. Therefore, the physical nature of matter is characterized by the continuous movement of its particles, which can be observed and studied through various activities.
Context: As we look at our surr oundings, we see a lar ge variety of things with dif ferent shapes, sizes and textures. Everything in this universe is made up of material which scientists have named “matter”. The air we breathe, the food we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and animals, even a small dr op of water or a particle of sand — every thing is matter . We can also see as we look around that all the things mentioned above occupy space and have mass. In other words, they have both mass* and volume**. Since early times, human beings have been trying to understand their surr oundings. Early Indian philosophers  classified matter in the form of five basic elements — the “Panch Tatva” — air , earth, fir e, sky and water . Accor ding to them everything, living or non- living, was made up of these five basic elements. Ancient Gr eek philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter . Moder n day scientists have evolved two types of classification of matter based on their physical pr operties and chemical natur e. In this chapter we shall lear n about matter based on its physical pr operties. Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. 1.1  Physical Nature of Matter 1.1.1 M ATTER  IS MADE  UP OF PARTICLES For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed regarding the natur e of matter . One school believed matter to be continuous like a block of wood, wher eas, the other thought that matter was made up of particles like sand. Let us perform an activity to decide about the natur e of matter  — is it continuous or particulate?Activity ______________ 1.1 •Take a 100 mL beaker . •Fill half the beaker with water and mark the level of water . •Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help of a glass r od. •Observe any change in water level. •What do you think has happened to the salt? •Wher e does it disappear? •Does the level of water change? In or der to answer these questions we need to use the idea that matter is made up of particles. What was ther e in the spoon,  salt or sugar , has now spr ead thr oughout  water . This is  illustrated in Fig. 1.1. 1.1.2 HOW SMALL  ARE THESE  PARTICLES OF MATTER ? Activity ______________ 1.2 •Take 2–3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water .Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water , the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles of water . *The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg). **The SI unit of volume is cubic metr e (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm3, 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm3.1 M MM MMATTER ATTERATTERATTERATTER      IN ININ ININ O  O O  O OUR URUR URUR S  S S  S SURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSChapter Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 2•Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water . •Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water . •Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times. •Is the water still colour ed ?1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER  ARE CONTINUOUSLY  MOVING Activity ______________ 1.3 •Put an unlit incense stick in a cor ner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell? •Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting at a distance? •Recor d your observations. Activity ______________ 1.4 •Take two glasses/beakers filled with water . •Put a dr op of blue or r ed ink slowly and car efully along the sides of the first beaker and honey in the same way in the second beaker . •Leave them undisturbed in your house or in a cor ner of the class. •Recor d your observations. •What do you observe immediately after adding the ink dr op? •What do you observe immediately after adding a dr op of honey? •How many hours or days does it take for the colour of ink to spr ead evenly throughout the water? Activity ______________ 1.5 •Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium per manganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water . Do

Q: What is the characteristic of particles of matter that allows them to intermix on their own?
A: The characteristic of particles of matter that allows them to intermix on their own is their kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, the particles move faster, which increases their kinetic energy, allowing them to intermix more easily.
Context: not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. •What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? •What happens as time passes? •What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? •Does the rate of mixing change with temperatur e? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following:Fig. 1.2:  Estimating how small ar e the particles of matter . With every dilution, though the colour becomes light, it is still visible. This experiment shows that just a few crystals of potassium per manganate can colour a lar ge volume of water (about 1000 L). So we conclude that ther e must be millions of tiny particles in just one crystal of potassium permanganate, which keep on dividing themselves into smaller and smaller particles. The same activity can be done using 2 ml of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. The smell can be detected even on repeated dilution. The particles of matter are very small – they ar e small beyond our imagination!!!! 1.2Characteristics of Particles of Matter 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER  HAVE  SPACE BETWEEN  THEM In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles of sugar , salt, Dettol, or potassium permanganate got evenly distributed in water . Similarly, when we make tea, cof fee or lemonade ( nimbu paani ), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other . This shows that ther e is enough space between particles of matter . Rationalised 2023-24 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDING S 3•If we consider each student as a particle of matter , then in which gr oup the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity ______________ 1.7 •Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. •Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. •In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity ______________ 1.8 •Take some water in a container , try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. •Were you able to cut the sur face of water? •What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together . The str ength of this for ce of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another . uestions 1.Which of the following are matter? Chair , air, love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water , smell of per fume. 2.Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3.A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4.What are the characteristics of the particles of matter?Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic ener gy. As the temperatur e rises, particles move faster . So, we can say that with increase in temperatur e the kinetic ener gy of the particles also incr eases. In the above thr ee activities we observe that particles of matter inter mix on their own with each other . They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two dif ferent types of matter on their own is called dif fusion. W e also observe that on heating, dif fusion becomes faster . Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES  OF MATTER  ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity ______________ 1.6 •Play this  game in the field— make four groups and for m human chains as suggested: •The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 •The second group should hold hands to for m a human chain. •The third gr oup should for m a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. •Now, the fourth gr oup of students should run ar ound and try to br eak the three human chains one by one

Q: What are the three states of matter and describe the properties of each state?
A: The three states of matter are solid, liquid, and gas. Solids have a definite shape, distinct boundaries, and a fixed volume. They are rigid and maintain their shape when subjected to outside forces. Solids may break under force, but it is difficult to change their shape. Examples of solids include a pen, a book, a needle, and a piece of wooden stick. Liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they are kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are fluid. Examples of liquids include water, cooking oil, milk, juice, and a cold drink. Gases have neither a definite shape nor a fixed volume. They occupy the entire container in which they are kept. Gases are highly compressible and can be easily compressed to a smaller volume. Examples of gases include the air we breathe, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. It is important to note that solids, liquids, and gases can diffuse into each other. The rate of diffusion of liquids is higher than that of solids due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state.
Context: into as many small gr oups as possible. •Which gr oup was the easiest to br eak? Why?Q Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 41.3States of Matter Observe different types of matter around you. What ar e its dif ferent states? W e can see that matter ar ound us exists in thr ee dif ferent states– solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter . Now, let us study about the pr operties of these thr ee states of matter in detail. 1.3.1 THE SOLID  STATE Activity _____________  1.9 •Collect the following articles — a pen, a book, a needle and a piece of wooden stick. •Sketch the shape of the above articles in your notebook by moving a pencil around them. •Do all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? •What happens if they are hammered, pulled or dr opped? •Are these capable of dif fusing into each other? •Try compr essing them by applying force. Ar e you able to compr ess them? All the above ar e examples of solids. W e can observe that all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, that is, have negligible compr essibility. Solids have a tendency to maintain their shape when subjected to outside for ce. Solids may br eak under for ce but it is dif ficult to change their shape, so they ar e rigid. Consider the following: (a)What about a rubber band, can it change its shape on str etching? Is it a solid? (b)What about sugar and salt? When kept in dif ferent jars these take the shape of the jar . Are they solid? (c)What about a sponge? It is a solid yet we ar e able to compress it. Why? All the above ar e solids as: •A rubber band changes shape under force and regains the same shape whenthe force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. •The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal r emains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in a jar. •A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we pr ess it, the air is expelled out and we ar e able to compr ess it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID  STATE Activity _____________ 1.10 •Collect the following: (a)water , cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b)containers of dif ferent shapes. Put a 50 mL mark on these containers using a measuring cylinder fr om the laboratory. •What will happen if these liquids ar e spilt on the floor? •Measur e 50 mL of any one liquid and transfer it into dif ferent containers one by one. Does the volume r emain the same? •Does the shape of the liquid r emain the same ? •When you pour the liquid fr om one container into another , does it flow easily? We observe that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they ar e kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are not rigid but can be called fluid. Refer  to activities 1.4 and 1.5 wher e we saw that solids and liquids can dif fuse into liquids. The gases fr om the atmospher e diffuse and dissolve in water . These gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, ar e essential for the survival of aquatic animals and plants. All living cr eatur es need to br eathe for survival. The aquatic animals can br eathe under water due to the pr esence of dissolved oxygen  in water . Thus, we may conclude that solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is Rationalised 2023-24 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDING S 5higher  than that of solids.  This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state. 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS  STATE Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a lar ge number of balloons fr om a single cylinder of gas? Enquire fr om him how many balloons is he able to fill fr om one cylinder . Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder . Activity _____________ 1.11 •Take thr ee 100 mL syringes and close their nozzles by  rubber corks, as shown in Fig.1.4. •Remove the

Q: What is the difference in the particle movement between solid, liquid, and gas states of matter?
A: In the solid state, particles are closely packed and have a fixed position, with little to no movement. In the liquid state, particles are close together but are able to move past one another, and in the gas state, particles are widely spaced and are free to move in any direction, with high-speed random movement.
Context: pistons fr om all the syringes. •Leaving one syringe untouched, fill water in the second and pieces of chalk in the third. •Insert the pistons back into the syringes. Y ou may apply some vaseline on the pistons befor e inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. •Now, try to compr ess the content by pushing the piston in each syringe.We have observed that gases ar e highly compr essible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied petr oleum gas (LPG) cylinder that we get in our home for cooking or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compr essed gas. Compressed natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compr essibility, large volumes of a gas can be compr essed into a small cylinder and transported easily. We  come to know of what is being cooked in the kitchen without even entering ther e, by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How does this smell r each us? The particles of the aroma of food mix with the particles of air spread fr om the kitchen, r each us and even farther away. The smell of hot cooked food reaches us in seconds; compar e this with the rate of dif fusion of solids and liquids. Due to high speed of particles and lar ge space between   them, gases show the pr operty of diffusing very fast into other gases. In the gaseous state, the particles move about randomly at high speed. Due to this random movement, the particles hit each other and also the walls of the container . The pressur e exerted by the gas is because of this force exerted by gas particles per unit ar ea on the walls of the container . Fig. 1.4 •What do you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in? •What do you infer fr om your observations? Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic pictur es of the thr ee states of matter . The motion of the particles can be seen and compar ed in the thr ee states of matter . Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 61.4.1 EFFECT  OF CHANGE  OF TEMPERATURE Activity _____________ 1.12 •Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory ther mometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6.uestions 1.The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density. (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in or der of increasing density – air , exhaust from chimneys, honey, water , chalk, cotton and ir on. 2.(a)Tabulate the dif ferences in the characterisitcs of states of matter . (b)Comment upon the following: rigidity, compr essibility, fluidity, filling a gas container , shape, kinetic energy and density. 3.Give r easons (a)A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept. (b)A gas exerts pr essur e on the walls of the container . (c)A wooden table should be called a solid. (d)We can easily move our hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4.Liquids generally have lower density as compar ed to solids. But you must have observed that ice floats on water . Find out why. 1.4Can Matter Change its State? We all know fr om our observation that water can exist in thr ee states of matter– •solid, as ice, •liquid, as the familiar water , and •gas, as water vapour . What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? W e need answers to these questions, isn’t it?Q (a) (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water , (b) conversion of water to water vapour Rationalised 2023-24 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDING S 7•Start heating the beaker on a low flame. •Note the temperature when the ice starts melting. •Note the temperatur e when all the ice has converted into water . •Recor d your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state. •Now, put a glass r od in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts boiling. •Keep a car eful eye on the ther mometer reading till most of the water has vaporised. •Recor d your observations for the conversion of

Q: What is the latent heat of vaporisation, and how does it relate to the change in state of water from liquid to gas?
A: The latent heat of vaporisation is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid into gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. For water, this temperature is 373 K (100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K). The latent heat of vaporisation is the energy absorbed by the particles in the liquid state to break free from the forces of attraction and change into the vapour state. It is the extra energy that particles in steam have absorbed compared to water at the same temperature, which makes them have more energy than particles in the liquid state.
Context: water in the liquid state to the gaseous state. On increasing the temperatur e of solids, the kinetic ener gy of the particles increases. Due to the incr ease in kinetic ener gy, the particles start vibrating with greater speed. The ener gy supplied by heat over comes the forces of attraction between the particles. The particles leave their fixed positions and start moving mor e freely. A stage is r eached when the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. The melting point of a solid is an indication of the strength of the force of attraction between its particles. The melting point of ice is 273.15 K *. The process of melting, that is, change of solid state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature remains the same, so where does the heat energy go? You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperatur e of the system does not change after the melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. This happens even though we continue to heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply heat. This heat gets used up in changing thestate by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperatur e, it is consider ed that it gets hidden into the contents of the beaker and is known as the latent heat. The wor d latent means hidden. The amount of heat ener gy that is r equir ed to change 1 kg of a solid into liquid at atmospheric pr essur e at its melting point is known as the latent heat of fusion. So, particles in water at 0oC (273 K) have more energy as compared to particles in ice at the same temperature. When we supply heat ener gy to water , particles start moving even faster .  At a certain temperatur e, a point is r eached when the particles have enough energy to break fr ee from the forces of attraction of each other . At this temperatur e the liquid starts changing into gas. The temperature at which a liquid starts boiling at the atmospheric pr essur e is known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles fr om the bulk of the liquid gain enough ener gy to change into the vapour state. For water this temperature is 373 K (100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K). Can you define the latent heat of vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we have defined the latent heat of fusion. Particles in steam, that is, water vapour at 373 K (1000 C) have mor e ener gy than water at the same temperatur e. This is because particles in steam have absorbed extra ener gy in the for m of latent heat of vaporisation. *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, 0o C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0o C = 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature.So, we infer that the state of matter can be changed into another state by changing the temperature. We have lear nt that substances ar ound us change state fr om solid to liquid and fr om liquid to gas on application of heat. But there Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 8enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter?are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity _____________ 1.13 •Take some camphor . Crush it and put it in a china dish. •Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. •Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. * atmospher e (atm) is a unit of measuring pr essur e exerted by a gas. The unit of pr essur e is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmospher e = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pr essur e of air in atmospher e is called atmospheric

