Q: What is the difference between a homogeneous and heterogeneous mixture?
A: A homogeneous mixture is a mixture that has a uniform composition throughout, meaning that the particles are evenly distributed and the mixture has a consistent appearance. A heterogeneous mixture, on the other hand, is a mixture that has a non-uniform composition, meaning that the particles are not evenly distributed and the mixture has a varied appearance. Examples of homogeneous mixtures include solutions, such as salt dissolved in water, while examples of heterogeneous mixtures include mixtures of sodium chloride and iron filings, salt and sulphur, and oil and water.
Context: Fig. 2.1:  Some consumable items Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ written on the packs of these consumables? For a common person pure means having no adulteration. But, for a scientist all these things are actually mixtures of different substances and hence not pure. For example, milk is actually a mixtur e of water , fat, pr oteins, etc. When a scientist says that something is pure, it means that all the constituent particles of that substance are the same in their chemical nature. A pure substance consists of a single type of particle. In other words, a substance is a pur e single for m of matter . As we look around, we can see that most of the matter around us exists as mixtures of two or more pure components, for example, sea water , minerals, soil, etc., ar e all mixtur es. 2.1 What is a Mixture? Mixtures  are constituted by more than one kind of pur e form of matter . We know that dissolved sodium chloride can be separated from water by the physical process of evaporation. However , sodium chloride is itselfa pure substance and cannot be separated by physical process into its chemical constituents. Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its composition is the same throughout. Soft drink and soil are not single pure substances. Whatever the source of a pure substance may be, it will always have the same characteristic properties. Therefore, we can say that a mixture contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 TYPES OF MIXTURES Depending upon the nature of the components that form a mixture, we can have different types of mixtures. Activity ______________ 2.1 •Let us divide the class into groups A, B, C and D. •Group A takes a beaker containing 50 mL of water and one spatula full of copper sulphate powder . Group B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula full of copper sulphate powder in a beaker . •Groups C and D can take different amounts of copper sulphate and potassium permanganate or common salt (sodium chloride) and mix the given components to form a mixture. •Report the observations on the uniformity in colour and texture. •Groups A and B have obtained a mixture which has a uniform composition throughout. Such mixtures are called homogeneous mixtures or solutions. Some other examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt dissolved in water and (ii) sugar dissolved in water . Compar e theHow do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter , salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy from the market are pure?2 III IIS SSSS M  M M  M MATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER A  A A  A AROUND ROUNDROUND ROUNDROUND  U  U U  U US SS SS P  P P  P PURE UREURE UREURE? ?? ??Chapter Rationalised 2023-24 More to  knowcolour of the solutions of the two groups. Though both the groups have obtained copper sulphate solution but the intensity of colour of the solutions is different. This shows that a homogeneous mixture can have a variable composition. •Groups C and D have obtained mixtures, which contain physically distinct parts and have non-uniform compositions. Such mixtures are called heterogeneous mixtures. Mixtures of sodium chloride and iron filings, salt and sulphur , and oil and water ar e examples of heterogeneous mixtures. Activity ______________ 2.2 •Let us again divide the class into four groups— A, B, C and D. •Distribute the following samples to each group: −Few crystals of copper sulphate to group A. −One spatula full of copper sulphate to group B. −Chalk powder or wheat flour to group C. −Few drops of milk or ink to group D. •Each group should add the given sample in water and stir properly using a glass rod. Are the particles in the mixture visible? •Direct a beam of light from a torch through the beaker containing the mixtur e and observe fr om the fr ont. W as the path of the beam of light visible? •Leave the mixtures undisturbed for a few minutes (and set up the filtration apparatus in the meantime). Is the mixture stable or do the particles begin to settle after some time? •Filter the mixture. Is there any residue on the filter paper? •Discuss the results and form an opinion. Groups A and B have got a solution. Group C has got a suspension. Group D has got a colloidal solution.Now, we shall learn about solutions, suspensions and colloidal solutions in the following sections. uestions 1.What is meant by a substance? 2.List the points of differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures. 2.2What is a Solution? A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or mor e substances. Y ou come acr oss various types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade, soda water , etc., ar e all examples of solutions. Usually we think of a solution as a liquid that contains either a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved in it. But, we can also have solid solutions (alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a solution there is homogeneity at the particle level. For example, lemonade tastes the same throughout. This shows that particles of sugar or salt are evenly distributed in the solution.Q

Q: What is the difference between a solution and a suspension?
A: A solution is a homogeneous mixture where the solute particles dissolve in the solvent, whereas a suspension is a heterogeneous mixture where the solute particles do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout the bulk of the medium. In a solution, the particles are smaller than 1 nm in diameter and cannot be seen by the naked eye, whereas in a suspension, the particles are visible to the naked eye.
Context: Fig. 2.2:  Filtration Alloys : Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or ametal and  a non-metal and cannot be separated into their components by physical methods. But still, an alloy is considered as a mixture because it shows the properties of its constituents and can have variable composition. For example, brass is a mixture of approximately 30% zinc and 70% copper . IS MATTER AROUND  US  PURE? 15 Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 16A solution has a solvent and a solute as its components.  The component of the solution that dissolves the other component in it (usually the component present in larger amount) is called the solvent.  The component of the solution that is dissolved in the solvent (usually present in lesser quantity) is called the solute. Examples: (i)A solution of sugar in water is a  solid in liquid solution. In this solution, sugar is the solute and water is the solvent. (ii)A solution of iodine in alcohol known as ‘tincture of iodine’, has iodine (solid) as the solute and alcohol (liquid) as the solvent. (iii)Aerated drinks like soda water , etc., ar e gas in liquid solutions. These contain carbon dioxide (gas) as solute and water (liquid) as solvent. (iv)Air is a mixture of gas in gas. Air is a homogeneous mixture of a number of gases. Its two main constituents are: oxygen (21%) and nitrogen (78%). The other gases are present in very small quantities. Properties of a Solution •A solution is a homogeneous mixture. •The particles of a solution are smaller than 1 nm (10-9 metre) in diameter . So, they cannot be seen by naked eyes. •Because of very small particle size, they do not scatter a beam of light passing through the solution. So, the path of light is not visible in a solution. •The solute particles cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. The solute particles do not settle down when left undisturbed , that is, a solution is stable. 2.2.1 C ONCENTRATION  OF A SOLUTION In activity 2.2, we observed that groups A and B obtained different shades of solutions. So, we understand that in a solution the relativeproportion of the solute and solvent can be varied. Depending upon the amount of solute present in a solution, it can be called  dilute, concentrated or  saturated solution. Dilute and concentrated are comparative terms. In activity 2.2, the solution obtained by group A is dilute as compared to that obtained by group B. Activity ______________ 2.3 •Take approximately 50 mL of water each in two separate beakers. •Add salt in one beaker and sugar or barium chloride in the second beaker with continuous stirring. •When no more solute can be dissolved, heat the contents of the beaker to raise the temperature by about 5oC.° •Start adding the solute again. Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium chloride, that can be dissolved in water  at a given temperature, the same? At any particular temperature, a solution that has dissolved as much solute as it is capable of dissolving, is said to be a saturated solution. In other words, when no more solute can be dissolved in a solution at a given temperature, it is called a saturated solution. The amount of the solute present in the saturated solution at this temperature is called its solubility. If the amount of solute contained in a solution is less than the saturation level, it is called an unsaturated solution. What would happen if you were to take a saturated solution at a certain temperature and cool it slowly. We can infer fr om the above activity that different substances in a given solvent have different solubilities at the same temperature. The concentration of a solution is the amount (mass or volume) of solute present in a given amount (mass or volume) of solution . There are various ways of expressing the concentration of a solution, but here we will learn only three methods. (i)Mass by mass percentage of a solution Mass of solute= ×100 Mass of solution Rationalised 2023-24 IS MATTER AROUND  US PURE? 17(ii)Mass by volume percentage of a solution Mass of solute= ×100 Volume of solution (iii)Volume by volume per centage of a solution Volume of solute= ×100 Volume of solution Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of common salt in 320 g of water . Calculate the concentration in terms of mass by mass percentage of the solution. Solution: Mass of solute (salt) =40 g Mass of solvent (water) =320 g We know, Mass of solution = Mass of solute + Mass of solvent = 40 g + 320 g = 360 g Mass percentage of solution Mass of solute= ×100 Massof solution                  40= ×100 =11.1% 360 2.2.2 W HAT IS A SUSPENSION ? Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2, in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solute  particles do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout the bulk of the medium. Particles of a suspension are visible to the naked eye. Properties of a Suspension •Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. •The

Q: What is the difference between a suspension and a colloid?
A: A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture where the particles are visible to the naked eye and can be separated from the mixture by filtration, while a colloid is a heterogeneous mixture where the particles are too small to be seen with the naked eye and are uniformly spread throughout the solution, making it appear homogeneous. Colloids are stable and cannot be separated from the mixture by filtration, but can be separated by centrifugation.
Context: particles of a suspension can be seen by the naked eye.•The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. •The solute particles settle down when a suspension is left undisturbed, that is, a suspension is unstable. They can be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. When the particles settle down, the suspension breaks and it does not scatter light any more. 2.2.3 WHAT IS  A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION? The mixture obtained by group D in activity 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution. The particles of a colloid are uniformly spread throughout the solution. Due to the relatively smaller size of particles, as compared to that of a suspension, the mixture appears to be homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk. Because of the small size of colloidal particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes. But, these particles can easily scatter a beam of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This scattering of a beam of light is called the Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist who discovered this effect. Tyndall effect can also be observed when a fine beam of light enters a room through a small hole. This happens due to the scattering of light by the particles of dust and smoke in the air . Fig. 2.3: (a) Solution of copper sulphate does not show Tyndall effect, (b) mixture of water and milk shows Tyndall effect.(a) (b) Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 18Q•Colloids are big enough to scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. •They do not settle down when left undisturbed, that is, a colloid is quite stable. •They cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. But, a special technique of separation known as centrifugation (perform activity 2.5), can be used to separate the colloidal particles. The components of a colloidal solution are the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component or the dispersed particles in a colloid form the dispersed phase, and the component in which the dispersed phase is suspended is known as the dispersing medium. Colloids are classified according to the state (solid, liquid or gas) of the dispersing medium and  the dispersed phase. A few common examples are given in Table 2.1. From this table you can see that they are very common everyday life.Tyndall effect can be observed when sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets of water , which act as particles of colloid dispersed in air . Fig. 2.4:  The Tyndall effect uestions 1.Differentiate between homogen- eous and heterogeneous mixtures with examples. 2.How are sol, solution and suspension different from each other? 3.To make a saturated solution,  36 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 g of water at 293 K. Find its concentration at this temperature.Properties of a Colloid •A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture. •The size of particles of a colloid is too small to be individually seen with naked eyes. Table 2.1:  Common examples of colloids Dispersed Dispersing Type Example phase Medium Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust Gas Liquid Foam Shaving cream Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, face cream Solid Liquid Sol Milk of magnesia, mud Gas Solid Foam Foam, rubber , sponge, pumice Liquid Solid Gel Jelly, cheese, butter Solid Solid Solid Sol Coloured gemstone, milky glass Rationalised 2023-24 IS MATTER AROUND  US PURE? 192.3Physical and Chemical Changes In the pr evious chapter , we have lear nt about a few physical properties of matter . The properties that can be observed and specified like colour , har dness, rigidity, fluidity, density, melting point, boiling point etc. are the physical properites. The interconversion of states is a physical change because these changes occur without a change in composition and no change in the chemical nature of the substance. Although ice, water and water vapour all look different and display different physical properties, they are chemically the same. Both water and cooking oil  are liquid but their chemical characteristics are different. They dif fer in odour and inflammability. W e know that oil burns in air whereas water extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property of oil that makes it dif ferent fr om water . Burning is a chemical change. During this process one substance reacts with another to undergo a change in chemical composition. Chemical change brings change in the chemical properties of matter and we get new substances. A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. During burning of a candle, both physical and chemical changes take place. Can you distinguish these? uestions 1.Classify the following as chemical or physical changes: •cutting of trees, •melting of butter in a pan, •rusting of almirah, •boiling of water to form steam, •passing of electric current, through water and the water

