Q: What is the law of conservation of mass, and how does it relate to the concept of atoms and molecules?
A: The law of conservation of mass states that mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. This means that the total mass of a chemical reaction's reactants and products remains constant. This law was established by Antoine L. Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust through experiments. The concept of atoms and molecules explains how the law of conservation of mass works. According to John Dalton's atomic theory, all matter is composed of small particles called atoms, which are indivisible and cannot be created or destroyed. When elements combine to form compounds, they do so in a ratio of small whole numbers, known as the law of definite proportions. This means that the mass of the reactants is equal to the mass of the products in a chemical reaction. Therefore, the law of conservation of mass is a direct result of the fact that atoms and molecules cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction.
Context: Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have always wonder ed about the unknown and unseen for m of matter . The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India, around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on dividing matter ( padarth ), we shall get smaller and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will come when we shall come across the smallest particles beyond which further division will not be possible.  He named these particles Parmanu . Another Indian philosopher , Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine and said that these particles nor mally exist in a combined for m which gives us various forms of matter . Around the same era, ancient Gr eek philosophers – Democritus and Leucippus suggested that if we go on dividing matter , a stage will come when particles obtained cannot be divided further . Democritus called these indivisible particles atoms (meaning indivisible). All this was based on philosophical considerations and not much experimental work to validate these ideas could be done till the eighteenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century, scientists r ecognised the dif fer ence between elements and compounds and naturally became inter ested in finding out how and why elements combine and what happens when they combine. Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation of chemical sciences by establishing two important laws of chemical combination. 3.1Laws of Chemical Combination The following two laws of chemical combination were established aftermuch experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 3.1.1 LAW OF CONSERVATION  OF MASS Is there a change in mass when a chemical change (chemical reaction) takes place? Activity ______________ 3.1 •Take one of the following sets, X and Y of chemicals— X Y (i)copper sulphate sodium carbonate (ii)barium chloride sodium sulphate (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride •Prepare separately a 5% solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y each in 10 mL in water . •Take a little amount of solution of Y in a conical flask and some solution of X in an ignition tube. •Hang the ignition tube in the flask carefully; see that the solutions do not get mixed. Put a cork on the flask (see Fig. 3.1). Fig. 3.1:  Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped in a conical flask containing solution of Y3 A AAAATOMS TOMSTOMS TOMSTOMS     AND ANDAND ANDAND M  M M  M MOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESChapter Rationalised 2023-24 ATOMS AND MOLECULES 27•Weigh the flask with its contents carefully. •Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y get mixed. •Weigh again. •What happens in the reaction flask? •Do you think that a chemical r eaction has taken place? •Why should we put a cork on the mouth of the flask? •Does the mass of the flask and its contents change? Law of conservation of mass states that mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. 3.1.2 LAW  OF CONSTANT  PROPORTIONS Lavoisier , along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of two or more elements and each such compound had the same elements in the same proportions, irrespective of where the compound came from or who prepared it. In a compound such as water , the ratio of the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is always 1:8, whatever the sour ce of water . Thus, if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, whatever the method or the source from which it is obtained. This led to the law of constant proportions which is also known as the law of definite proportions. This law was stated by Proust as “In a chemical substance the elements are always present in definite proportions by mass ”. The next problem faced by scientists was to give appropriate explanations of these laws. British chemist John Dalton provided the basic theory about the natur e of matter . Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of matter , which was till then just a philosophy. He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the Greeks and said that the smallest particles of matter are atoms. His theory was based on the laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic theory provided an explanation for the law ofconservation of mass and the law of definite proportions. John Dalton was born in a poor weaver’s family in 1766 in England. He began his car eer as a teacher at the age of twelve. Seven years later he became a school principal. In 1793, Dalton left for Manchester to teach mathematics, physics and chemistry in a college. He spent most of his life there teaching and researching. In 1808, he presented his atomic theory which was a turning point in the study of matter . According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all matter , whether an element, a compound or a mixtur e is composed of small particles called atoms. The postulates of this theory may be stated as follows: (i)All matter is made

Q: What is the concept of atomic mass, and how did Dalton's atomic theory propose it?
A: The concept of atomic mass refers to the characteristic mass of an atom of an element, and Dalton's atomic theory proposed it as a fundamental property of each element, which is a multiple of the atomic mass of hydrogen.
Context: of very tiny particles called atoms, which participate in chemical reactions. (ii)Atoms are indivisible particles, which cannot be cr eated or destr oyed in a chemical r eaction. (iii) Atoms of a given element ar e identical in mass and chemical pr operties. (iv)Atoms of dif ferent elements have different masses and chemical properties. (v)Atoms combine in the ratio of small whole numbers to for m compounds. (vi)The r elative number and kinds of atoms are constant in a given compound. You will study in the next chapter that all atoms are made up of still smaller particles.  uestions 1.In a r eaction, 5.3 g of sodium carbonate reacted with 6 g of acetic acid. The products were 2.2 g of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g water and 8.2 g of sodium acetate. Show that theseQ John Dalton Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 28We might think that if atoms ar e so insignificant in size, why should we care about them? This is because our entire world is made up of atoms. W e may not be able to see them, but they are there, and constantly affecting whatever we do. Through modern techniques, we can now produce magnified images of surfaces of elements showing atoms.observations are in agreement with the law of conservation of mass. sodium carbonate + acetic acid → sodium acetate + carbon dioxide + water 2.Hydrogen and oxygen combine in the ratio of 1:8 by mass to for m water . What mass of oxygen gas would be r equir ed to react completely with 3 g of hydr ogen gas? 3.Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory is the r esult of the law of conservation of mass? 4.Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain the law of definite pr oportions? 3.2What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a r oom and then a collection of r ooms to for m a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block of an ant-hill? It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the building blocks of all matter are atoms. How big are atoms? Atoms are very small, they are smaller than anything that we can imagine or compar e with. Mor e than millions of atoms when stacked would make a layer barely as thick as this sheet of paper . Atomic radius is measured in nanometres. 1/10 9 m=1 nm 1 m =109 nm Relative Sizes Radii (in m) Example 10–10Atom of hydr ogen 10–9Molecule of water 10–8Molecule of haemoglobin 10–4Grain of sand 10–3Ant 10–1AppleFig. 3.2:  An image of the sur face of silicon 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY SYMBOLS  OF  ATOMS OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS ? Dalton was the first scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense. When he used a symbol for an element he also meant a definite quantity of that element, that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius suggested that the symbols of elements be made from one or two letters of the name of the element. Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as pr oposed by Dalton Rationalised 2023-24 ATOMS AND MOLECULES 29In the beginning, the names of elements were derived from the name of the place where they were found for the first time. For example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from specific colours. For example, gold was taken from the English word meaning yellow. Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an international scientific organisation which approves names of elements, symbols and units. Many of the symbols are the first one or two letters of the element’s name in English. The first letter of a symbol is always written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the second letter as a small letter (lowercase). For example (i)hydrogen, H (ii)aluminium, Al and not AL (iii)cobalt, Co and not CO. Symbols of some elements are formed from the first letter of the name and a letter , appearing later in the name. Examples are: (i) chlorine, Cl, (ii) zinc, Zn etc. Other symbols have been taken from the names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, potassium is K from kalium. Therefore, each element has a name and a unique chemical symbol. (The above table is given for you to refer to whenever you study about elements. Do not bother to memorise all in one go. With thepassage of time and repeated usage you will automatically be able to reproduce the symbols). 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic mass. According to him, each element had a characteristic atomic mass. The theory could explain the law of constant proportions so well that scientists were prompted to measure the atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the mass of an individual atom was a relatively difficult task, relative atomic masses were determined using the laws of chemical combinations and the compounds formed. Let us take the example of a compound, carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 g of carbon combines with 4

Q: What is the concept of atomic mass, and how did Dalton's atomic theory propose it?
A: The atomic mass unit (amu) is defined as one-twelfth the mass of an atom of carbon-12, and it is used to express the relative atomic masses of elements by comparing their masses to the mass of one carbon-12 atom. The relative atomic mass of an element is the average mass of an atom of that element, relative to 1/12th the mass of one carbon-12 atom. This allows for the convenient expression of atomic masses as whole numbers or near whole numbers.
Context: g of oxygen to form CO. In other words, carbon combines with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose we define the atomic mass unit (earlier abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now written as ‘u’ – unified mass) as equal to the mass of one carbon atom, then we would assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However , it is more convenient to have these numbers asTable 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen O Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon Si Bromine Br Iodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon C Lead Pb Sulphur S Chlorine Cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc Zn Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 30whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers as possible. While sear ching for various atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally occurring oxygen as the unit. This was consider ed relevant due to two r easons: •oxygen reacted with a lar ge number of elements and for med compounds. •this atomic mass unit gave masses of most of the elements as whole numbers. However , in 1961 for a universally accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope was chosen as the standar d reference for measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth (1/12th) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. The r elative atomic masses of all elements have been found with r espect to an atom of carbon-12. Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a water melon and says, “this has a mass equal to 12 units” (12 water melon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. Fig. 3.4 : (a) W atermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the atom of an element is defined as the averagemass of the atom, as compared to 1/12th the mass of one carbon-12 atom. Table 3.2: Atomic masses of a few elements Element Atomic Mass (u) Hydrogen 1 Carbon 12 Nitrogen 14 Oxygen 16 Sodium 23 Magnesium 24 Sulphur 32 Chlorine 35.5 Calcium 40 3.2.3 HOW DO ATOMS  EXIST ? Atoms of most elements are not able to exist independently. Atoms for m molecules and ions. These molecules or ions aggr egate in large numbers to for m the matter that we can see, feel or touch. uestions 1.Define the atomic mass unit. 2.Why is it not possible to see an atom with naked eyes? 3.3What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together , that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules.Q Rationalised 2023-24 ATOMS AND MOLECULES 313.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as ar gon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the non- metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O2. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O3. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structur e but consist of a very lar ge and indefinite number of atoms bonded together . Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Type of Name Atomicity Element Non-Metal Ar gon Monoatomic Helium Monoatomic Oxygen Diatomic Hydrogen Diatomic Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Sulphur Poly-atomicTable 3.4 : Molecules of some compounds Compound Combining Ratio Elements   by Mass Water (H2O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH3)Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO2)Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity ______________ 3.2 •Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms pr esent in molecules and T able 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in T able 3.4. •The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest by mass ratio/ ratio mass (u) atomic mass H 1 11 1=1 2 O 8 168 16=1 21 •Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3 WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and non- metals contain char ged

Q: What is the atomic mass unit (amu) defined as, and how is it used to express the relative atomic masses of elements?
A: The chemical formula of magnesium chloride is MgCl2.
Context: species. The char ged species are known as  ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na+) and negatively charged3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4. Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 32chloride ions (Cl–).  A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). W e shall lear n mor e about the for mation of ions in Chapter 4.learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. V alency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH4 as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in T able 3.6. W e will lear n mor e about valency in the next chapter . * Some elements show mor e than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket.Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Constituting Ratio Compound Elements by Mass Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen 5:2 Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 3.4Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to Table 3.6:  Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ncy ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na+Hydrogen H+Ammonium NH4+ Potassium K+Hydride H-Hydroxide OH– Silver Ag+Chloride Cl-Nitrate NO3– Copper (I)* Cu+Bromide Br-Hydrogen Iodide I–carbonate HCO3– 2. Magnesium Mg2+Oxide O2-Carbonate CO32– Calcium Ca2+Sulphide S2-Sulphite SO32– Zinc Zn2+Sulphate SO42– Iron (II)* Fe2+ Copper (II)* Cu2+ 3. Aluminium Al3+Nitride N3-Phosphate PO43– Iron (III)* Fe3+ Rationalised 2023-24 ATOMS AND MOLECULES 333. Formula of carbon tetrachloride For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg2+) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their char ges ar e criss-crossed to get the for mula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Formula : MgCl2 Thus, in magnesium chloride, there ar e two chloride ions (Cl-) for each magnesium ion (Mg2+). The positive and negative char ges must balance each other and the overall structur e must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Formula : Al2O3 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. Y ou may arrive at the for mula Ca2O2. But we simplify the for mula as CaO.The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: •the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. •when a compound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- metals  and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. •in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH)2. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE  OF SIMPLE  COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. V alencies of some ions ar e given in Table 3.6. Y ou can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Formula of the compound would be HCl. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide Rationalised 2023-24 SCIENCE 34following formulae: (i)Al2(SO4)3 (ii)CaCl2 (iii) K2SO4 (iv) KNO3 (v)CaCO3. 3.What is meant by the ter m chemical for mula? 4.How many

